I've seen some articles lately talking about how 0^0 is definitely zero, or definitely one. And I don't blame people for being confused! 0^0 is a very tricky concept when you're seeing it for the first time. 

0^0 is only three symbols, but try to punch it into a calculator and the calculator complains "0^0 is undefined". Undefined? Why? Isn't math all about definitions? Are the mathematicians hiding their secrets from us laypeople again? Math can't define this basic three-character symbol? Clearly it's just zero! Or maybe one! It should have some simple answer!

What is 0^0, and why do people keep saying it's "undefined"?

## The short version

0^0 is undefined because x^y follows two simple patterns, and we want 0^0 to follow both of them, and 0^0 can't follow both of them.

If x is a positive number, then 0^x = 0, and also x^0 = 1. (More on that below.) When you try to decide what 0^0 should be, one rule says the definition should be 0^0 = 0, and the other rule says the definition should be 0^0 = 1. So you can't DEFINE 0^0 to follow one rule without violating the other. "Any definition of 0^0 would violate at least one of the rules" is a mouthful, so for short we say 0^0 is "undefined".

## In more detail

First, a little secret: The "rules" of math are more like different ways to fill in a coloring book. You can choose the rules which make the most sense depending on what you want to do.

For example, everyone agrees on what x^y means when x and y are integers: it's just repeated multiplication. 2^3 means 2 * 2 * 2 = 8. 5^4 means 5 * 5 * 5 * 5 = 625. I'm going to call this the INTEGER RULES: x^y, when x and y are integers, means multiplying x with itself y times.

The problem is, what is 0^0? How do you multiply something with itself 0 times? The answer is: you can't. The INTEGER RULES aren't enough to tell us what the answer should be.

In that case, let's make up some more rules! For example, we could decide x^y = 23842 for every case not covered by the INTEGER RULES. But it wouldn't be very satisfying if 2^3 = 8 but 2^3.0001 = 23842. Intuitively, if we're defining how x^y should work when x and y are new types of numbers, mathematicians prefer if the new rules keep following the old patterns.

So let's look at the patterns that the INTEGER RULES follow, decide what patterns we want x^y to follow, and then make up our own rules for 0^0.

## Pattern 1: Multiplying Zero With Itself. 

0^3 = 0 * 0 * 0 = 0. 0^2 = 0 * 0 = 0. 0^1 = 0. In general, 0^x = 0, if x is an integer. Therefore, we could follow this pattern into the non-integers and define EXPONENT PATTERN 1: 0^x = 0, even if x isn't an integer.

## Pattern 2: Adding Exponents. 

4^3 * 4^2 = 4^5. 7^5 * 7^5 = 7^10. In general, x^a * x^b = x^(a+b).

Following this pattern tells us EXPONENT PATTERN 2: x^0 = 1. 

Why? Because x^a * x^0 = x^(a+0), meaning x^a * x^0 = x^a. There's only one number which you can multiply by x^a and get x^a: 1. So the only rule consistent with pattern 2, the adding-exponents pattern, is x^0 = 1.



So now we have two rules: one which says x^0 = 1, and another which says 0^x = 0. Both rules are true when x is any integer greater than zero. If you agree to the INTEGER RULES, you agree that x^0 = 1 and 0^x = 0 whenever x isn't an integer.

But what if x=0? According to EXPONENT PATTERN 1, 0^x = 0, so if you choose to apply this rule when x=0, 0^0 = 0. But if you apply EXPONENT PATTERN 2, x^0 = 1, then 0^0 = 1.

To define 0^0, you'd have to choose whether to define 0^0 using EXPONENT PATTERN 1 or define using 0^0 EXPONENT PATTERN 2. But they both seem like valid rules! The patterns work for all numbers except zero, so why not continue the pattern!

That's why we say "0^0 is undefined". There's two perfectly valid definitions, and you can choose which definition you want to use depending on what math you're working with. If you're doing a lot of multiplying by zero, you might choose the definition 0^0 = 0. If you're doing a lot of work with polynomials like x^2 and x^3, you might choose the definition x^0 = 1. 

(Usually mathematicians work more with polynomials, so x^0 = 1 is more common. Sometimes mathematicians will use the term "formal power series", and when they do you should imagine a mathematician in a suit or dress promising that it's okay to use x^0 = 1 because they solemnly swear that this x is just a symbol and will never, ever, represent zero. Afterwards they usually put on sunglasses, backflip onto a horse, and start messing with infinitely long polynomials and dividing by we-promised-it-wasn't-zero.)

## bonus stuff

In fact, those aren't the only rules you can choose. If you graph the function x^y, you can see that at the center, where x = y = 0, there's a big spike. our two rules corresponded to approaching the origin along the line x=0 or along the line y=0. but you could also approach along the line x = y and slowly bring x and y closer to 0, and then you'd get a different rule for x^y when x and y approach (0,0)

